# Publishing workflow

The **publishing workflow** is the process in which external resources are
collated together with the help of an **authoring tool** and subsequently
arranged with a **formatting tool** to generate a publishable output that can be
delivered in different forms. In this **roadmap** we exclude (1) the process of
generating the external resources and (6) the delivery system.

```{mermaid}
---
Publishing workflow
---
flowchart LR
  
    E1("(1)\nExternal resources"):::external -.-> A1
    A1{{"(2)\nAuthoring tool"}} --> I1("(3)\nText + Figures +\nCode + Tables + ..."):::input
    I1 --> P1{{"(4)\nFormatting tool"}}
    P1 --> O1["(5)\nFormatted\nOutput"]:::output
    O1 -.-> D1{{"(6)\nDelivery system"}}:::delivery
    classDef external fill:#eee,stroke:#666,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5;
    classDef input fill:#ffa;
    classDef output fill:#faa;
    classDef delivery stroke:#666,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5;
```

An example of a publishing workflow is the following. A research group may
carry out an investigation which ends up with **(1)** data, figures, analyses,
and results, those resources are put together with an **(2)** authoring tool
like Overleaf which produces an **(3)** organised hierarchy of files and text
that includes formatting information, then using a **(4)** formatting tool like
pdfLaTeX all the artefacts are combined into a **(5)** pdf document that can be
**(6a)** printed as a stand alone document, or **(6b)** included into the
proceedings of a conference. 

%We refer to the `publishing workflow` to the combination of an `authoring
%process` that involves the gathering of external resources together and puts
%them together 
%
%in which input artefacts are generated, and the `formatting process`
%that takes the necessary artefacts and composes them into an output that can be
%published. The input artefacts are often text narratives that include figures,
%tables, equations and format descriptions, while the formatted output contains
%all the necessary artefacts combined in such a way that can be published in the
%required form. 
%
%is the full process in which authors produce results
%and the correspoinding input artefacts that will be necessary to compose a
%publication, and the `formatting` that is involved to compile all the
%material into the final publication. 
%
%In this `Roadmap` we want to emphasize the difference between the `authoring`
%and the `formatting` parts of the full `publication workflow`. The `authoring`
%consists on creating a structured composition of input artefacts that are
%necessary to generate the objective publication. The authoring may also
%be able to generate an output, but this one may differ slightly on the final
%output generated by the publication system. The differences may have a
%technical origin, or the editors may need to do some changes for the final
%publication.
%
%```{note}
%I remved the Output preview of the authoring tool. I need to change the text.
%```
%
% The process of creating the input artefacts is commonly distributed,
% non-linear and may generate redundant information. Keeping all the versions of
% the artefacts updated may be a challenge, as parts of the artefacts are
% re-used and adapted to be used within the authoring tools.
%
%```{mermaid}
%flowchart LR
%  
%    I1("Source code"):::input -.->|Part of the code| MS
%    I1 & I3{{"Analysis"}} --> M1("Results"):::input
%    M1 --> I3
%    I3 --> M2("Figures + Tables + \n ..."):::input
%    I4["Other sources"]:::external --> M2
%    M1 -.->|Part of the results| MS("Figures + Code + \n Tables + ..."):::input
%    M2 -.->|Subset| MS
%    classDef input fill:#ffa;
%    classDef external fill:#aaa,stroke:#333,stroke-dasharray: 5 5;
%```

## Authoring tools

**Authoring tools** are computer programs or platforms that provide a user
interface to arange all sorts of input artefacts (e.g. plain text, markup
language, tables, figures, code, or equations) in a way that can be formated
later. These tools need to integrate metadata about the format in which the
different artefacts need to be shown in different output forms. For example,
the font of the text and its position, the position of figures, tables and
other elements. Section [](sec:aut) provides additional information about
currently available _authoring tools_.

## Formatting tools

**Formatting tools** are computer programs or platforms that given specific
instructions and input artefacts that include metadata are able to combine them
in a desired output form (e.g. website, pdf, poster, or slides). Some
_formatting tools_ are specialised in one type of output, while other ones can
generate multiple forms depending on the provided metadata. We differentiate
between two types of paradigms *Single-In-Single-Out (SISO)*, and
*Single-In-Multi-Out (SIMO)*. In this roadmap we focus mostly on the SIMO type,
as we will see that covers more flexible systems for authoring training
material.

### Single-In-Single-Out

_Formatting tools_ commonly specialise in generating only one type of
output from one or more input files. This is one of the most
common approaches when producing an article. The text, figures, tables and
other artefacts are assembled with some authoring tool and compiled with a
specialised formatting tool to produce a printable pdf. Once it has been
accepted a presentation may require parts of the original artefacts and a
different _formatting tools_. It is then common to have a duplicate of the same
content with mild modifications in a separate environment. The same process is
often repeated if a poster, computational notebooks, or a website need to be
created. We refer to this paradigm of publishing system as Single-In-Single-Out
as each system works independently, while the authors need to keep up to date
copies of similar content in each of them.

```{mermaid}
%%{ init : { "flowchart" : { "curve" : "stepBefore" }}}%%

flowchart LR
  
    S1("External sources\nVarious modifications"):::empty -.-> I1
    S1 -.-> I2
    S1 -.-> I3
    S1 -.-> I4
    I1("Text + Figures + \n Code + ... v.1"):::input --> P1{{"Formatting tool 1"}}
    I2("Text + Figures + \n Code + ... v.2"):::input --> P2{{"Formatting tool 2"}}
    I3("Text + Figures + \n Code + ... v.3"):::input --> P3{{"Formatting tool 3"}}
    I4("Text + Figures + \n Code + ... v.4"):::input --> P4{{"Formatting tool 4"}}
    P1 --> O1["Published \n Paper \n (PDF)"]
    P2 --> O2["Presentation \n Slides \n (PPTX/PDF)"]
    P3 --> O3["Poster \n (PPTX/PDF)"]
    P4 --> O4["Computational \n Notebook \n (Colab)"]
    style O1 fill:#fca
    style O2 fill:#bff
    style O3 fill:#f99
    style O4 fill:#bfb
    classDef input fill:#ffa;
    classDef empty fill:#aaa,stroke:#333,stroke-dasharray: 5 5;
```

Common examples of this type of paradigm are the publishing workflows achieved
when creating text documents with Microsoft Word[^word], Libre Office
Writer[^writer], LaTeX[^latex]; sets of slides with Microsoft
PowerPoint[^powpoint], LibreOffice Impress[^impress], LaTeX Beamer[^beamer],
Reveal.js[^reveal], or Google Slides; or posters with Microsoft Publisher,
Google Slides, LaTeX, etc.

[^word]: https://www.microsoft.com/en-gb/microsoft-365/word
[^latex]: https://www.latex-project.org/
[^writer]: https://www.libreoffice.org/discover/writer/

[^powpoint]: https://www.microsoft.com/en-gb/microsoft-365/powerpoint
[^impress]: https://www.libreoffice.org/discover/impress/
[^beamer]: https://ctan.org/pkg/beamer
[^reveal]: https://revealjs.com/

### Single-In-Multiple-Out

More modern _formatting tools_ allow the generation of multiple types of
publication formats from a joint set of input artefacts. We refer to this
paradigm as Single-In-Multiple-Out (SIMO). This paradigm offers various
benefits, among them: **(1)** keep all the artefacts in a unique
location facilitates finding the required documents, **(2)** keeping a unique
source of history changes and versions which is useful for auditing and
transparency, **(3)** not duplicating artefacts that are not changed between
different publishing systems.

```{mermaid}
%%{ init : { "flowchart" : { "curve" : "stepBefore" }}}%%

flowchart LR
    I1("Text + Figures + \n Code + ..."):::input --- dummy2{{"Formatting tool"}}
    dummy2 --> O1["Published \n Paper \n (PDF)"]
    dummy2 --> O2["Presentation \n Slides \n (PPTX/PDF)"]
    dummy2 --> O3["Poster \n (PPTX/PDF)"]
    dummy2 --> O4["Computational \n Notebook \n (Colab)"]
    classDef input fill:#ffa;
    style O1 fill:#fca
    style O2 fill:#bff
    style O3 fill:#f99
    style O4 fill:#bfb
```

Nowadays, this type of _formatting tools_ are getting more common being able to
produce multiple types of outputs from the same sources. In this roadmap we
focus on the state-of-the-art formatting tools that fall into this category.
The same roadmap is an example of one of such tools (Jupyter Book), while the
rest of the document and use cases also include Quarto. A description of these
and other publishing tools is described with more detail in Section [](sec:for).

## Hybrid tools

**Hybrid tools** are a combination of both _authoring_ and _formatting_
tools. While in some situations it is a good practice to separate the two
aspects, some computer programs integrate them in one tool that may (or may
not) provide access to the intermediate artefacts. For example, softwares like
Microsoft Word are authoring tools that already provide the formated output
durint the authoring process. Another typical example in academic environments
is Overleaf that provides an online collaborative authoring platform that
integrates with _pdfLatex_ in the back end. Section [](sec:hyb) provides
additional information about those tools.
