# Glossary

Glossary of common terms used in the new ways of publishing.

**Host**

Machine or service that is hosting the website/book.

**Client**

The final user's device that is requesting the website. This is most commonly a
web browser in a computer or phone.

**Server**

Machine or service that is used as a hosting, or as a computer node that
returns requested computations.

**Run in the browser**

Quality of an online code that allows the client web browser to run the code
without the need of an external computational server.  The content of the
website is still provided by a host as a static page, but any changes in the
code and computations are done solely in the client.

**Notebook**

Sequence of cells with text and code that can be executed linearly. The text is
usually _markdown_ and the code has to be one of several supported programming
languages.


**Collaborative**

Quality of a notebook to be edited by multiple users at the same time with the
capability of dealing with possible edition conflicts.

**In-browser notebook:** 

**Publishing system**

Tool or platform that allows the creation of online content that can be
displayed in a web browser (see [quarto](https://quarto.org/) description).

**Directives**

Special functions that are defined in a publishing system to render a piece of
code in the form of text in a predefined manner. Some examples of directives
already available in Jupyter{book} is the _{note}_ that renders a text as an
information box.

```{note}
This is an example of the directive note
```

**Authoring application**

**Editing environment** 

**Development environment**

Integrated Development Environment (IDE) that allows the edition of content.

**Frame**

In the context of text edition, said to the surrounding characters that
indicate a special piece of text. For example the use of the dollar signs for
mathematical notation (`$\Sgima_{i=0}^N i$` is rendered as $\Sigma_{i=0}^N i$).

**Interactive computing:**

**Artefact**

Any form of input that is used to generate the content presented to the final
user. Some common artifacts are figures, tables, code snippets or mathematical
typesetting.

**Composition toolkit**

A set of tools that can automatically aggregate a pool of artefacts and compose
them in a series of output formats (e.g. paper, presentation slides, poster,
computational notebook).

**MyST Markdown**

Extended markdown syntax that supports basic academic publishing features like
tables, figures, mathematical typesetting and bibliography management.

**Publication Workflow**

Full publication process from the generation of the input artefacts to the end
result of a publication output.


## Other available glossaries of related terms.

- [Jupyter{book}](https://jupyterbook.org/en/stable/reference/glossary.html)

